#Exercise Part 1: Understanding a Specific Feature

//The main components involved in task creation/updates

        .cli.py
This is the user-facing entry point. It reads commands from the terminal and turns them into actions
. For example, when the user types a command to create a task or change its status, this file parses the arguments and
 sends the request to the task manager.

        .task_manager.py
This is the core business logic layer. It is the most important file for task creation and updates because it decides what should happen when a task is created or changed.
 It handles things like:
                    building a new Task
                    setting default values
                    updating status, priority, due date, or tags
                    updating timestamps

        .models.py
This defines the domain model. It gives structure to the data by defining:
                Task
                TaskStatus
                TaskPriority
    This file tells us what a task is and what fields it should have.

        .storage.py
This is the persistence layer. It is responsible for saving tasks to disk and loading them back. It handles:
                    writing tasks into tasks.json
                    reading tasks from tasks.json
                    converting between Python objects and JSON data
    So the system is split into:
                input handling (cli.py)
                business rules (task_manager.py)
                data structure (models.py)
                storage (storage.py)

    //The execution flow when a task is created/updated
         
         ..When a task is created
    The user runs a terminal command such as:
1.python cli.py create "Finish report" -d "Write section 2" -p 3
2.cli.py uses argparse to read the command and arguments.
3.cli.py calls a method in task_manager.py, such as a create task method.
4.task_manager.py creates a new Task object using the structure from models.py.

5.During creation, it sets values such as:
unique ID
title
description
default status
priority
timestamps
optional due date
optional tags

6.task_manager.py sends that task to storage.py.
7.storage.py saves the task into tasks.json.
8.cli.py prints feedback to the user, such as the created task ID.

        ..When a task is updated
    The user runs a command such as:
1.python cli.py status <task_id> done
2.cli.py parses the command and arguments.
3.cli.py calls the relevant update method in task_manager.py.
4.task_manager.py fetches the task from storage.py.

5.If the task exists, task_manager.py changes the requested field, for example:
status
priority
due_date
tags

6.It updates updated_at.
7.If the new status is done, it also sets completed_at.
8.The updated task is saved again through storage.py.
9.cli.py prints a success message or the updated task details.

        //How storage works
The app does not use a database. Instead, it uses JSON as a lightweight persistence method.

    Saving data
When a task is created or updated:
    the task object is converted into JSON-friendly data.
    Enums and dates are transformed into values that JSON can store.
    The full task list is written into tasks.json.

    Loading data
When the app needs tasks:
    storage.py opens tasks.json
    JSON content is read
    The raw data is converted back into Task objects
    Those objects are returned to task_manager.py

What this means
Tasks survive between program runs
The system behaves like a small persistent app
JSON replaces a full database for simplicity
This is a good design for a beginner or small CLI project because it avoids database setup while still keeping data persistent.

   //interesting design patterns discovered

Yes, there are a few good design ideas in the project.

1. Separation of concerns
The project separates responsibilities clearly:
    cli.py handles input
    task_manager.py handles logic
    models.py defines data
    storage.py handles persistence
This is one of the strongest patterns in the codebase because it keeps the app organized.

2. Layered design
The code follows a small layered architecture:
    presentation layer → cli.py
    business layer → task_manager.py
    data/storage layer → storage.py
    domain layer → models.py
This is not a large enterprise architecture, but it follows the same idea.

##Exercise Part 2: Deepen Understanding Through Guided Questions

1. My initial understanding

I understood the project at a high level as a simple Python CLI application that:
    takes user input through the terminal
    processes it in task_manager.py
    and stores data in a JSON file via storage.py
I believed the flow was straightforward:
    CLI → Task Manager → Storage → JSON
    While this was correct, it was also oversimplified.

What I discovered

Through guided questioning, I realized that:
    The system is not just passing data around — it is applying business rules, especially in task_manager.py
    The CLI is intentionally thin, meaning it should not contain logic, only routing
    The Task object is central, and everything revolves around its lifecycle
    Updates are not just field changes — they include side effects, like updating timestamps and setting completed_at
    Data persistence is not just saving — it involves serialization and reconstruction of objects

So my understanding evolved from:
    “This is a simple flow-based program”
to:
    “This is a layered system with clear separation between input, business logic, domain model, and persistence”

    //2. Key insights the guided questions helped me uncover

The guided questions helped me think deeper about the code instead of just reading it.
    
    Insight 1: Separation of responsibilities is intentional
I learned that:
        cli.py should not contain business logic
        all rules (like status updates, timestamps, validations) belong in task_manager.py
        This helped me understand where to implement new features properly

    Insight 2: Data flow is more structured than I thought
Instead of just “passing data,” I realized:
        Data is transformed at each layer
        cli.py → raw user input
        task_manager.py → structured logic + validation
        models.py → formal structure
        storage.py → serialized format
        This gave me a clearer mental model of how data moves through the system

    ##3. Misconceptions that were clarified
Misconception 1: The CLI is where logic happens
I initially thought some logic might live in cli.py.
     Clarified:
     The CLI only routes commands
     All real logic belongs in task_manager.py

Misconception 2: Updating a task is just changing a value
I assumed updates were simple assignments.
     Clarified:
     Updates often include business rules and side effects
     Example: marking a task as done also sets completed_at

Misconception 3: JSON storage is just “saving data”
I thought storage was just writing data to a file.
     Clarified:
     Storage involves encoding and decoding objects
     There is a transformation between Python objects and JSON format

###Exercise Part 3: Mapping Data Flow

//Data flow diagram

[User in Terminal]
        |
        v
[cli.py]
Reads command and arguments
        |
        v
[task_manager.py]
Applies business logic
- finds task
- updates status
- updates timestamps
        |
        v
[models.py]
Task object holds the updated state
        |
        v
[storage.py]
Loads current tasks
Replaces updated task
Saves full task list
        |
        v
[tasks.json]
Persistent stored data
        |
        v
[cli.py output]
Shows success message / updated task


      //State changes that occur during task completion
When a task is marked as complete, several state changes happen.

      Before completion
A task may look like this:
         status = todo or in_progress or review
         completed_at = None
         updated_at = previous timestamp
      
      After completion
When the user sets the status to done, the application changes:
         status becomes DONE
         updated_at becomes the current date/time
         completed_at becomes the current date/time
         So task completion is not just one field change. It includes:
Lifecycle change
The task moves into its final workflow stage.
Audit/update change
The app records when the task was last modified.
Completion event recording
The app stores the exact time the task was completed.

     //Potential points of failure in this process
There are several places where task completion could fail.

     1. Invalid task ID
If the user provides a task ID that does not exist:
   task_manager.py will not find the task
   the update cannot continue
   This is one of the most common failure points.

     2. Invalid status value
If the user enters a status that is not allowed:
   cli.py may reject it through argparse
   or conversion to TaskStatus may fail
For example:
            python cli.py status 123 finished
If finished is not a valid enum value, the process breaks.
 
     3.Error handling gaps
If exceptions are not caught properly:
   the user may see a crash instead of a clean error message
   partial updates might become harder to trace

  ### How the application persists these changes

The application persists changes through JSON file storage.
The persistence process
When a task is completed:
     task_manager.py updates the Task object in memory
     storage.py loads the current collection of tasks
     it replaces or updates the matching task
     it writes the full updated task list back into tasks.json
So persistence is not done one field at a time. Instead, the application usually:
     loads the task list
     modifies the relevant object
     saves the whole collection again

What gets persisted
The JSON file stores the task’s updated state, including:
     id
     title
     description
     priority
     status
     created_at
     updated_at
     due_date
     completed_at
     tags

Example persistence idea

Before saving, Python objects must be converted into JSON-friendly values:
     enums become strings or numeric values
     dates become strings

Then when loading:
     strings are converted back into TaskStatus, TaskPriority, and datetime values

That means persistence has two important parts:
     encoding
     decoding

Why this matters
     This allows the completed task to remain complete even after the program closes and reopens.
Without persistence:
     the status would reset when the app exits
With persistence:
     the task stays marked as done in future runs


####Exercise Part 4: Reflection and Presentation

This application is a Python command-line Task Manager that allows users to create, 
update, and track tasks, with data stored locally in a JSON file.

The architecture follows a layered design, with clear separation of responsibilities:

     * cli.py (Presentation Layer)
          Handles user input from the terminal and routes commands.
     * task_manager.py (Business Logic Layer)
         Contains the core logic for creating, updating, and managing tasks.
     * models.py (Domain Layer)
         Defines the structure of a task, including status, priority, and timestamps.
     * storage.py (Persistence Layer)
         Handles saving and loading tasks from a JSON file.

This separation makes the system easier to maintain and extend.

2. How the Three Key Features Work:

Task Creation
     The user enters a command in the terminal.
     cli.py parses the input and calls task_manager.py.
     A new Task object is created using the structure from models.py.
     The task is saved to tasks.json via storage.py.
  Flow:
CLI → Task Manager → Model → Storage

Task Prioritization
     Each task has a TaskPriority value (Low, Medium, High, Urgent).
     The user can set or update priority through a CLI command.
     The system updates the task and saves the change.
     This allows users to organize tasks based on urgency.

Task Completion
     The user updates a task’s status to done.
  The system:
         changes the status
         updates updated_at
         sets completed_at
      This shows that one action can trigger multiple business rules.

3. One Interesting Design Pattern

One key pattern I discovered is Separation of Concerns with Layered Architecture.
Each file has a clear responsibility:
     CLI handles input
     Task Manager handles logic
     Models define structure
     Storage handles persistence

This makes it easy to:
     add features (like CSV export)
     implement business rules (like overdue tasks)
     test functionality independently

4. What Was Most Challenging & How Prompts Helped

The most challenging part was understanding:
     how data flows across files
     where business logic should be placed
     how updates trigger side effects like timestamps

At first, the project looked simple, but I didn’t fully understand the structure.
The AI prompts helped by:
         guiding me to identify the domain model first
         encouraging me to trace features end-to-end
         helping me focus on why the code is structured this way

Instead of just reading code, I learned to:
     analyze layers
     follow data flow
     understand design decisions

5. My Process for Gaining Understanding

Instead of jumping straight into coding, I:
     Identified the core entity (Task)
     Traced how a feature works from CLI → storage
     Looked for patterns in how features are implemented
     Used guided prompts to ask better questions
This approach helped me understand not just the code, but the system design.

 Closing Line

This project showed me that even a small CLI application can follow real-world architectural patterns,
 and that understanding the structure and data flow is key to confidently adding new features.